                     The Judging of the Priestess

                           By NELSON S. BOND

                Out of future Mexico the Japcans came,
               invading Jinnia. And Meg, the priestess,
               faced dual judgment as she brought Daiv,
                      her man, back to the tribe.

    In these latter years of the 35th Century, Mount Rushmore, with its
    colossal statues of Washington, Jefferson, Lincoln and Theodore
    Roosevelt was known to the superstitious tribeswomen as "the Place
    of the Gods." From a pilgrimage to this holy spot (where she had
    met Daiv and learned the great secret that the Ancient Ones were
    Men) Meg was returning. (_"The Priestess Who Rebelled," Amazing
    Stories, October, 1939._)--Ed.

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                   Fantastic Adventures April 1940.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Behind them the sun sank lazily, a huge, lop-sided ball of fire
too-bright-to-be-looked-at, and the gathering fingers of dusk stole
softly through the trees, casting wan shadows where they touched. The
air was thin and cold with the breath of approaching night; imps of
darkness lurked in the tree-roots and hollows.

But Meg felt no fear. She was alive with warmth, light, happiness. The
hills about her were soft-bosomed and gay with autumn's garments; no
longer was the landscape salt and drear as it had been back there in
the 'Kota territory, in the Place of the Gods. This was her homeland,
her native Jinnia. Beyond that turn was a rill, a half day's march
beyond the rill lay the village of her own tribeswomen....

From her seat astride Nessa, she looked down upon Daiv, her Man, and
her voice was vibrant with happiness.

"We are almost there, Daiv! Soon you will meet my people, talk with
them, learn to love them as I do."

Daiv smiled at her dubiously.

"That I am prepared to do, Golden One. I can't help wondering, though,
how they will accept me. After what you've told me about the Men of
your tribe--" He shook his head.

Meg made a happy-sound deep in her throat; slipped from Nessa's back
and covered Daiv's lips with her hands.

"There is nothing to fear, Daiv. The Men of my Clan--_pah!_--they are
not like you. They are weak things, meant only for breeding. The Mother
will know, the moment she sees you, that you are one like the Gods. She
too made the pilgrimage. She will rejoice and be glad. And--" Meg moved
closer into the circle of his arms. "She will be gladder still when she
sees our happiness."

"I hope so," said Daiv soberly. His lips met hers in the
touching-of-mouths that he had taught her. Then, "But it is too late
for us to finish our journey today," he said. "We must find a place to
make camp."

"Just beyond the turn," Meg told him excitedly. "I know every inch
of this country, Daiv. When I was young, and studying under the Mother
to become a Priestess of the Clan, I used to ride out here to seek
solitude and the guidance of the Gods. Just beyond the turn there is
forest and a small stream. This is an ancient land, my lover; the trees
are mighty and strong. But--" Her eyes found his adoringly. "But not so
mighty and strong as you."

Daiv said, "Now, Golden One!" reprovingly, but Meg felt happy-crinkles
in her heart as she saw the way he drew back his shoulders to lead the
way into the forest. She did not mount Nessa again, but walked behind
Daiv, leading the tamed and captive doe by its bridle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nessa had been Daiv's gift to her, a mount to take the place of the
horse Meg had lost on her way to the Place of the Gods when the Wild
One had attacked her. "A wedding gift," Daiv had called it--which did
not make sense. But, then, Daiv was always saying strange things. That
was, Meg thought, a trifle awefully, because he came from Kirki, which
was a holy place far to the southland, near the Land of the Escape. His
tribespeople were direct descendants of those Ancient Ones who, long
ages ago, had fled from Earth to the evening star in the bowels of a
metal bird that spat fire.[1]

[Footnote 1: In the 20th Century a tiny group of scientists, laboring
under the direction of Dr. Frazier Wrenn, escaped the holocaust of war
that bathed civilization by fleeing to the planet Venus in the first
spaceship. Their rocketdrome was in the desertlands of Arizona. (_"The
Fugitives from Earth," Amazing Stories, December, 1939._)--Ed.]

Daiv's skill had captured Nessa, wild woodland doe, but Meg's
gentleness had tamed her. She had borne Meg across all these foreign
territories; through Braska and Zurrie, to the blue-shining fields of
Tucky; now, at last, back to Meg's beloved Jinnia.

It had been a long journey and a strange one. Many things had Meg
seen; curiosities that would thrill the Women of her Clan to startled,
"Aiees!" of astonishment when she told of them. She had seen the long,
straight roads built by the Ancient Ones; their smooth _creet_ now
cracked and worn but still easier to travel than the tortuous woodland
paths. She had seen the remnants of a gigantic _hoam_ called Sinnaty,
where once had lived a great folk called "the Reds." She and Daiv
had lingered for three days with the tribeswomen of Loovil (whose
Mother knew the Mother of Meg's Clan, and had sent greetings and gifts
of ripe, fragrant bacca); there had they seen an antique statue of a
horse-god named Manowah.

They had even--Meg thrilled at the recollection--slept in one of
the traditional oaken _hoams_ peculiar to the Tucky folk; dwellings
immortalized in the Tucky tribal song, "--sing one song of my oaken
Tucky _hoam_--"

And, "It is such a great land, Daiv!" Meg had said one night, lying
sleepless and excited over the wonders she had seen that day. "Such
a great land, this Tizathy! How I wish I had lived in it when the
Ancient Ones had welded it all together."

"A great land, indeed," was Daiv's answer. "But what did you call it?
Tizathy?"

"Yes," explained Meg. "That was its name. One of the ancient songs
tells of it. 'My country, Tizathy; sweet land of liberty--'"

Daiv looked at her with vast respect. "Someday we must visit my people,
Golden One. The elders of my tribe will want to talk to you. You have
such great learning...."

But now, at last, their journey was over. Jinnia's sweet green hills
cradled them; tomorrow they would join and touch hands with Meg's
sisters. Tonight they would sleep in the little forest Meg knew so
well....

Daiv turned, an unfamiliar wrinkle-look on his forehead. "Golden One,
didn't you say we were coming to forest land?"

"Yes, Daiv. Right before you. There--"

Then Meg was at his side, and her eyes were round with wonderment.
"But--but this is not right!" she cried.

It was no forest that confronted them. Where Meg's memory had told
her would be a riotous jungle of intertwining green, great trees that
brushed the heavens, high archways of leaves and thick-boled woodland
monarchs, there was nothing but a vast and desolate plain, strewn with
bristling twigs!

Stark and severe was that glade, swept bare of all vegetation save
these thousands upon countless thousands of twigs. No grass, no shrubs,
no flowers. Rough, bare hillside, and ankle-deep--the host of stunted
branches.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I--I don't understand!" said Meg bewilderedly. She looked at Daiv,
fear suddenly cold in her heart, and she made a magic sign over her
breast to ward away the evil wood ghosts. "This is not as it should be,
Daiv! Something--"

The plain echoed Daiv's boisterous happy-sound.

"Something tells me," he chuckled, "you've made a mistake, Golden One.
So you know every inch of this country, eh? Well--" He shrugged. "It is
a cloudless night. And plain or forest, this is as good a place as any
to make camp. Get water, Meg, for the cawfee, and I will build a fire."

Silently, with a sun-heat burning her cheeks, Meg moved to the rill and
got water. Then, as silently again, she returned to the spot Daiv had
designated. By this time she expected he would have made fire-sparks
with a rock and the bit of flame-metal he carried in his pouch--but to
her great surprise, no crackling blaze awaited her.

Instead, Daiv was standing upright beside one of the branched twigs
that festooned the plain. There was an angry-look on his face;
perspiration dripped from his forehead and his throat. The look he
turned to her was red with shame.

"Meg," he began, "Meg--a magic is upon me. I am weak. I have no
strength!"

"Strength, Daiv?"

"Yes. Look!" He bent to the broken branch before him. His strong thighs
tensed; the muscles of his back and shoulders corded with strain. Fresh
perspiration broke from his pores as he strained to lift the tiny twig.
Then his hands, white-knuckled and trembling, lifted clear; he looked
at her again.

"It is so small," he said in a faint, hurt voice. "Yet I cannot lift
it!"

Meg sprang to his side; bent to the twig. She was slim, a pale, golden
shadow beside Daiv, but she was strong. Her hands grasped the rough
bark; she lifted--

And fell forward, thrown completely off balance by that weight
imponderable. Coarse soil rasped her knees, but she did not feel the
pain. All lesser emotions were lost in the swift, superstitious fear
that engulfed her.

"The forest is accursed, Daiv! We must flee!"

Hand in hand they raced wildly across the plain to the shelter of the
woodland at its farther rim. The rays of the dying sun cast their
shadows long before them, and a dry rattle of mirth seemed to rise from
the tangle of unyielding twigs that bruised their feet....

       *       *       *       *       *

Meg dreamed fear-dreams that night. She was lost in a jungle of trees
hard as bone; as she fled beneath them, these trees groaned and toppled
toward her, their motionless branches clutching like skeletal fingers.
She moaned, cried Daiv's name--then wakened to find him leaning over
her anxiously.

"Meg! Listen!"

In the cool morning the sound carried clearly to Meg's ears. A human
voice, high-pitched in hideous screaming. A hoarse, grating voice. Meg
shuddered.

"A Wild One, Daiv! He has fallen into one of our traps."

"Wild One? Trap?"[2]

[Footnote 2: When womankind, wearying of man's incessant warfare,
finally cast all men save a few breeders from their cities and
established a matriarchal form of government, the men rapidly reverted
to a life of savagery. In Meg's day they were known and hunted as the
"Wild Ones."--Ed.]

"I'll show you." Meg rose swiftly, instantly awake as any forest
animal. Bright morning sun cascaded down upon her, wakening a sister
gleam of gold on her arms and thighs, touching to warm life the tawny
down between her high, proud breasts. Save for the white girdle of
flesh beneath her fur breech-clout, Meg was all gold; her hair, piled
in a loose knot upon her head, was like a shining crown. It was not all
Women, Daiv thought briefly, whose charm withstood the early morning
sun. He was lucky to have found as a mate this slim lance of loveliness.

He hungered for her lips. But he was Daiv--"He-who-would-learn"--and
here was a new mystery. He followed Meg. Meg followed the plaintive
cries.

They stopped, at length, at the lip of a cleft in the earth. It had
formerly been covered over with a webbing of boughs and ferns, but now
that cover was broken, and from the bottom of the pit came the howls
of pain that had drawn them.

Meg's lips were grim, white lines.

"He is in there," she said--and as she spoke she unslung her hunting
bow, slipped a bone-tipped arrow from her quiver. She stepped to the
mouth of the crevice, drew aim. Then--

"Wait, Golden One!"

Daiv swept the weapon from her hands. He looked down into the pit,
cried out sharply, then, ignoring Meg's warning, lowered himself
into it. A moment later he was back again, slipping his burden from
his shoulder. His burden was, as Meg had guessed, a brutish, hairy
Man-thing; foul with the stench of unwashed sweat and grease, grimy
with blood and dirt.

"You were going to kill him!" Daiv accused sternly. "He is a Man,
wounded, and you were going to kill him!"

The priestess said haughtily, "He is not a Man, he is one of the Wild
Ones. Of course I was going to kill him. That is the Law."

"It is a poor Law," grunted Daiv. He was bending over the Wild One now,
cleaning his wounds with handfuls of clean, dried grass. "If the Women
of your tribe build traps like these for Men, I'm not sure I want to
meet them. Aagh! False tops, and sharpened sticks beneath!"

Meg the Priestess disappeared, and in her place stood Meg the wife, a
look of bafflement in her eyes.

"But, Daiv--" Faintly. "You killed one of the Wild Ones yourself. The
first time we met."

"That," said Daiv curtly, "was because he tried to linber you. I wanted
you for myself. There--he's coming around now. How do you feel, Man?
Are you all right?"

The Wild One's eyes were uncomprehending as they saw the golden-limbed
priestess and this strange, hairless Man before him. His bearded lips
parted in a strangled fragment of speech.

"I am ... all right." Then, to Daiv alone, "You ... saved my life!"

Daiv nodded. Thoughts crawled slowly behind the Wild One's eyes; he
reached a decision. From his filthy loin cloth he drew a chipped and
rusted blade; this he offered to Daiv. With the other hand he smoothed
flat the verminous tangle of hair above his heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

"My life is yours, stranger," he said humbly.

Meg's eyes were wide with astonishment. From infancy she had been
taught that the Wild Ones were mad creatures without mercy, without
human sentiments; beasts that prowled the forests with but two thoughts
in their minds: to satisfy the hungers of their bellies and to kill.
Yet here was a Wild One displaying the civilized emotion of gratitude.
To Daiv she said querulously,

"He must be crazed, Daiv! Let us take him with us to the village. The
tribe Mother will want to see this marvel--a Wild One with a Woman's
instincts."

"He goes free!" said Daiv. He was still curt. He lifted the Wild One to
his feet. "Can you find your fellows, Wild One?" he asked.

The Wild One nodded mutely.

"Then, go!" ordered Daiv. "And be more careful of traps in the future.
Begone!"

But the Wild One hesitated an instant longer. The words came haltingly
from his lips--but they sprang from his heart. "My life is still yours,
Hairless One. Should ever you decide to claim it, you will find me
north of this spot. In a hillside cave by the waterfall...."

Then he was gone; a brutish, gnarled, hairy shadow sliding through the
matted jungle. And to Meg, "Come. Let us find your people," said Daiv.
"I am minded to see what folk would harm poor brutes like that one."

Meg pondered for hours, as they marched those last few miles to her
native village, but she could not quite discover why it was that her
cheeks and throat felt so hot. It was as though the fever-god was
within her, but she knew she was not ill....

And so, finally, she riding upon Nessa's back, Daiv striding before her
on swift, sure feet, they came to Meg's home. To the village of the
Jinnia Clan that was her own.

And again the remembrance of the massive twig and the strange forest
returned, bringing with it a half-fear. It lay uneasily in their minds
like the brooding residue of a dream....




                              CHAPTER II

                             The Invaders


The glad word sprang first from the lips of the Warriors who guarded
the gates of the village. "It is Meg! Meg has returned from her
pilgrimage. Tell all!"

It spread to the Workers in the fields; they rose from their labors,
wiping grit-coarsened hands upon their thighs; their eyes brightened.
"Meg has returned!" And the breeding-mothers heard, they lolling their
plump, lush bodies in the sunlit doorways. They heard, and their soft
eyes filled with ready tears; they waddled forward, their bulging hips
swaying like ripened corn. "It is Meg, come back from the Place of the
Gods!"[3]

[Footnote 3: The matriarchal commune was made up of Warriors, Workers
and breeding-mothers, all headed by a learned Mother whose mantle of
leadership was handed down from generation to generation. Upon reaching
maturity, each girl was permitted to choose which branch of service she
should adopt. The Priestess, Meg, was studying to become the Mother of
her Clan; hence her pilgrimage to the Place of the Gods.--Ed.]

The Men, too, heard. They simpered foolishly and rolled their great,
soft eyes and primped their oiled hair. And word reached the tribal
Mother who came from her _hoam_ to meet the Priestess. They met within
the confines of Meg's village; the aged Mother moved to greet Meg with
arms outstretched.

"You are returned safely, my child. May the Gods live forever!"

Meg could not speak for the little happy-imp who clutched her throat
and made water in her eyes. Her hands, tight and hot on the withered
hands of the old Mother, were speech enough. The Mother bent forward
and made a sign upon Meg's forehead.

"You have learned the Great Secret, my daughter; I can tell that by the
look in your eyes. Now you have passed the last barrier between you and
the Motherhood of our Clan. Tonight we will have a great feast; at its
conclusion I will invest you in the ultimate mysteries of your task--"

There was a stir in the crowd surrounding Meg and the Mother; Daiv,
chafing with impatience at being thus ignored, had thrust himself
forward to his wife's side.

"What is this, Meg!" cried the Mother. "Have you turned Warrior as well
as Priestess? Where did you capture this hairless Man-thing?"

Now was the moment Meg had been at once dreading and looking forward
to. She placed her hand proudly within Daiv's, and her voice was the
clarion call of trumpets.

"It is no Man-_thing_, Mother. It is a Man; a real Man such as were the
Gods! Not a scrimping parody like our breeders, nor a foul brute like
the Wild Ones--but a Man. He is Daiv, my mate!"

"_Mate!_" The word leaped not only from the mouth of the Mother; it was
rasped by the Workers and the Warriors, it was piped in the shrill,
frightened quaver of the breeding-mothers. The Mother's eyes clouded.

"Mate, Meg? What madness is this? Surely you know a priestess who would
be a Mother may not mate with a Man!"

Daiv said humbly, yet at the same time pridefully, "So Meg believed,
O Mother, until I taught her differently--and until she learned
the Great Secret at the feet of the Gods. I am Daiv, known as
'He-who-would-learn'; I come from the place of the Escape. My people
live by the Laws of the Ancient Ones. In our land Man and Woman are
equal; we give and take love in the sacred customs of marriage."

Meg wished desperately that Daiv had said nothing. Given time to lead
up to these revelations, she felt she might have presented the argument
more convincingly. But in Daiv's deep voice these truths--which she now
recognized to be truths--sounded like rankest heresies.

And they drew from the assembled listeners the response Meg had feared.
There was the snicking of metal upon metal as the Warriors half-drew
their swords from their scabbards; a low rumble of dissent growled from
the throats of the Workers. The breeding-mothers squealed like stricken
animals, fled with hands covering their ears lest the Gods destroy them
for having heard this impious outburst.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lora, Chieftain of the Warriors, stepped forward, her lean jaw grim.
"Blasphemy, O Mother! By Tedhi, She-who-laughs, this Man-thing befouls
us with his lies. Shall I strike him down?"

She took a step toward Daiv. Meg cried out, moved between them, turned
beseeching eyes to the Mother. "No! I beg of you, O Mother, no! Look
upon Daiv! Look--and remember that which _you_ saw, many winters ago,
in the Place of the Gods! You know I speak the truth, Mother, and that
Daiv, too, tells that which is so.

"Tell my sisters that this is well; that this is as it should be. _You_
know--"

Jain, Captain of the Workers, shook her head sorrowfully. In a gentle
voice she said, "Our priestess has gone mad, O Mother. The rigors of
the pilgrimage have been too much for her. What is the law? Death for
her, as well as for this hairless Man-thing? Or, having taken herself a
Man, must she become a breeding-mother?"

But the Mother stayed her. There was a faraway look in her eyes; Meg
knew that the aged leader of the Clan was remembering a pilgrimage made
many, many years ago to the Place of the Gods. The Mother, Meg knew,
had once looked upon the majestic figures of Jarg, Ibrim, Taamuz and
Tedhi on their great, rocky promontory at Mount Rushmore and had seen,
as Meg had seen, that the Gods were, in truth, Men like Daiv. A word
from the Mother now....

The Mother spoke. There was infinite sadness in her voice.

"It is the Law," she said, "that none shall strive to change the ways
of the Clan. You, Meg, have ignored the Law. You and your mate will be
given justice."

And she turned away.

A gasp spun Meg's gaze to Daiv. His face was crimson with an
anger-look; great veins throbbed in his forehead. He roared, "Here,
then, is the joyous welcome your Clan offers us, Golden One! Justice?
What kind of justice may we expect from a doddering, thwarted old
harridan--"

"_Daiv!_" screamed Meg.

But her cry broke too late. With one swift gesture Daiv had wrenched
the sword from the hands of Lora. Now he tested its blade, swept Meg
into the circle of his arms, and laughed at the startled clanswomen
defiantly.

"So you would judge a Man?" he taunted. "A Man of the Kirki tribe?
Come, then, you filthy diggers of dirt and loveless scarecrows. Let
your judgment be the matching of my steel against yours!"

There was a tense moment of silence. Then anger, bitter as the fruit
of the simmon tree, flamed in the voices of Meg's sisters. A score of
Warriors sprang forward, swords drawn. At their flank advanced the
Workers, hoes and adzes uplifted. Meg smiled piteously at Daiv and
murmured a swift prayer to the Gods. It was grievous to die thus,
before the blades of loved ones....

       *       *       *       *       *

And a faint, thin cry stayed them all! They turned to see, at the
deserted southward gate, the torn and bleeding figure of a Warrior
who, hair disheveled, face scarred and raw, hands and arms deep-scored
with gory cicatrices, pulled herself within the Jinnia camp dragging
behind her one sturdy leg and one blackened, withered stump.

In that moment of dread wonder it did not even seem strange to the
clanswomen that the first to reach the wounded Warrior's side should be
the stranger, Daiv. But Daiv it was who raised her in his arms.

The visitor's eyes were filmed with pain, horror, fatigue. They
unveiled now, and an indomitable purpose shone through. In a husky
voice she faltered, "It is too late ... to save me. Soon I will
join ... my Clanswomen ... and the Gods. Save ... yourselves!"

There was unbelievable gentleness in Daiv's voice.

"What is it, Warrior?" he asked. "What enemy thus cruelly destroyed
you? Of what would you warn us?"

From some deep-hidden well the messenger drew new strength. Her eyes
blazed as she answered, "I bid you flee to the secret spots of the
mountains. An evil foe even now marches upon your camp. Stunted and
vicious little yellow-skinned Men-things who linber[4] our Clans,
destroy our fighters with tubes that maim and stun."

[Footnote 4: Linber--to kidnap, (derived from Lindbergh?)--Ed.]

The aged Mother was beside her now.

"Who are you, daughter?" she begged. "Whence come you?"

"I am Vivyun," labored the refugee, "of the Durm Clan. Short days
ago came strange lightings in the heavens; mad thunders burst in the
forests about our village--"

Jain interrupted, startled, "Mother! The omens we heard night before
last in the forest to our west!" and Meg looked swiftly at Daiv. She
cried,

"The forest through which we fled, Daiv! The wood of heavy twigs!"

Daiv silenced her with a thoughtful nod. Vivyun's halting speech
continued.

"--then came the onslaught. Armored demons, the color of mustard seed,
burst upon us. Our Warriors went to meet them but the dwarfs loosed
lights from sticks and where the soldiers had stood, now were but
inch-long, stony parodies of Women. One of the lights played for an
instant upon my leg--"

Meg looked and shuddered. The dying Warrior's leg was firm and round
from hip to thigh; ten inches above the knee it ended abruptly in a
scoriated stump from which depended an ugly, wartlike excrescence
which--Meg saw with sickening horror--was the perfectly formed
simulacrum of a human limb.

Daiv was muttering savagely, "Speak on, Warrior!"

"They come," persisted Vivyun, "to capture Women. Like the Wild Ones,
they die out for lack of Mates. Out of the far southland they come,
from a land called Mayco. They bear other strange weapons. A stick
that shoots lights of insanity ... a wall they build of invisible
bricks...."

"More!" pleaded Daiv and the Mother in one breath as Vivyun faltered.
"More!"

But a strange, foolish look glazed the dying one's eyes. Her lips
moved whitely and her breath was a whisper. "You are a strange ...
creature," she said to Daiv. "Somehow you ... make it easy to die ...
Man-thing...."

Then she was still.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lora, Chieftain of the Warriors, broke the spell that bound them all
with a thunderous cry.

"Invaders? No invaders can take the village of the Jinnia tribe! To
arms, Warriors! To your posts. Let these yellow dwarfs attack _us_,
and--" She laughed evilly.

Daiv sprang to his feet; his voice a peremptory challenge. "Hold,
Warrior! Did you not hear what Vivyun said? These invaders have magic
weapons; sticks that spit insanity and crumpling death. It is best we
should flee to the hills. Maybe there we can devise some way--"

Meg's cheeks were hot with sorrow for Daiv as the Warrior Chieftain
scorned him with her eyes.

"It is a Man-thing after all!" she spat. "A hairless Wild One with the
cowardly instincts of all Men. Fool! Know you not the dying one babbled
foolishness in her delirium? Sticks that dwarf Warriors! Walls without
bricks!"

Daiv gritted, "I have no time for argument, Warrior." To the Mother
he cried beseechingly, "There is little love lost between me and thy
Clan, O Mother. But because you are Meg's sisters, I would see you
live. Believe me, there was truth in Vivyun's warning. I myself have
heard elders speak of a sunlit land called 'Mayco,' peopled by savage
demons--"

The Mother pressed her hands together in an agony of indecision. To
Meg, in her desperation, she turned, crying, "See now, O my daughter,
how heavy is the task of being a Mother?" And she muttered, half to
herself, "If this be true, then all are doomed unless we flee. But if
it be lies--"

Daiv, man of action, tired swiftly of this maundering. For the second
time that afternoon he reached for Meg's hand.

"Come, Golden One! Let these fools die; let them become stiffened twigs
of humans as the branches we saw in the forest were stiffened and
dwarfed trees! I will take _you_ to safety--"

Meg took a step forward. And then--one of the Women laughed. A sneering
laugh. Meg's cheeks flamed, and her outstretched hand dropped to her
side. She shook her head.

"No, Daiv." Sadly. "I had not dreamed you were--"

"A coward?" Daiv supplied the word wrathfully. "I am a coward to wisely
flee from the magic of men who know the secrets of the Ancient Ones? By
the Gods, Golden One, it is you who have lost your senses. If you will
not come willingly, I'll save you in spite of yourself. Come!"

And he sprang toward her. Meg stumbled backward, torn by a thousand
conflicting emotions. Then, of a sudden, came that which coalesced all
her emotions into one indistinguishable chaos. There came a mighty
roaring _sough_ from the woodlands south of the village; a portion of
the walls caved inward with a mighty crash; spent air howled like the
breath of the flood-time gods, and--

In the opening, golden sunlight gleamed on glinting armor! A horde of
dwarfed and evil yellow men, shining sticks in their hands, stormed in
through the rent!




                              CHAPTER III

                          The Mate of Grensu


What happened then was never afterward to be clear in Meg's mind. She
realized that the air was alive with the cries of the attacking dwarfs;
that these cries found echoes in the shouts of her Warrior sisters who
sprang forward to meet them.

She was conscious that a Warrior at her side, with a half-uttered
choke of fear, had suddenly met breast-high a streaming light expelled
from one of the invaders' sticks; she heard the clatter of metal upon
rock as the Warrior's sword fell. She did not realize she had stooped
instinctively to retrieve the fallen weapon until she found herself
charging forward, cries ripping her throat, the sword waving above her
head.

There seemed to be two Megs; one who raced futilely, vaingloriously,
toward that crouching, smirking band of attackers; the other who stood
somewhere apart from the mad press, watching the battle with impartial
judgment. It was the first Meg who flashed down upon a stunted yellow
man unnoticed, swung her heavy sword in a flailing motion that split
his hauberk and sent his headless body toppling to earth.

It was the second Meg who noticed, with incredibly cool appraisal,
that from the sticks of the invaders emerged two different types of
light. One, a pale, greenish light, caused those bathed in it to drop
their swords, cease their shouting, wander aimlessly off across the
blood-drenched field. The other, a cherry-flamed light, was the horror
of which the Durm Warrior, Vivyun, had warned.

The attackers seemed only to use _it_ when dire necessity pressed. Its
results were ghastly. Meg's brain reeled before the shock of seeing a
Worker on her right run full-tilt into that cherry beam. One instant
the Worker was there; the next she was gone. A sharpened hoe lay beside
a blasted doll-like thing from which, momentarily, rose a steamy mist
and a nauseating stench.

Given weapons to match those of the yellow dwarfs the Jinnians might
have won through. Their numbers were as great as those of the invaders;
their spirit was that of Women fighting for their native homeland.
Gallantly they pressed onward, forward--and as gallantly they died.
Save for that greater portion of them who assumed the "life-in-death"
Meg had marked; the stupid insanity that sent them staggering,
weaponless, upon mindless errands.

For conquerors, the yellow men waged stupid war. They seemed more
intent on capturing prisoners than on destroying--or perhaps they
had not anticipated such a stubborn resistance. Howsoever that may
have been, time and again a member of the Jinnia Clan, evading the
sticks-that-flamed, would pierce the enemy lines. There, ere the cherry
light steamed her body into brittle stone, her sword would draw the
life-blood of a yellow invader.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meg had learned much in her long pilgrimage to and from the Place of
the Gods. Daiv had taught her how to take advantage of all natural
protections when warring against a superior force. These guerilla
tactics served her well now. With the first conflict of forces she had
sprung to a place of concealment behind the ruptured wall; from this
vantage point she could see straggling invaders as they entered the
village; could not be seen by them until their eyes widened at the
sight of a dripping sword thirsting for their throats.

Four died thus beneath her blade. Cautiously, now, she ventured a
glance into the yellow men's defense line.

There she saw what her quick intelligence told her must be the object
of her attack. Outside the village stood a tiny knot of dwarfs garbed
in armor more glittering, more ornate, than that of those who made the
attack.

These, Meg recognized, were the leaders. The commander-in-chief must be
that overripe, ochre plum in golden greaves and casque; he who stood
impatiently fingering the handle of his light-stick as he watched his
warriors' progress.

To think was to act. It never occurred to Meg that her solo foray was
suicidal. Hurdling the bodies of those before her, she leaped through
the broken wall; raced, bobbing and weaving, shifting her course to
make herself an impossible target, down upon the commander's party.

As she ran, her hair broke loose from its handknit snood; lithe muscles
snapped the sinews that held her cloak. She was like some magnificent
golden panther as, hair flowing behind her in a liquid honey stream,
high, firm breasts rising with the quickening of her breath, she
charged down on her tribe's enemies.

Thoughts flashed dizzily through her mind. A great burst of exultation;
she was too near, now, for them to stop her! Then a soul-shaking
disappointment. She had been seen! One of the officers' eyes bugged; he
raised a light-stick--

Then most incredible thing of all--the commander-in-chief had seen
her, and his porcine eyes, slanted and deep-sunk in rolls of saffron
flesh, were glittering with delight. His left hand was beating down
the cherry-flame of the lieutenant as his right was pointing at her
breast his own stick. Light flashed--pale green. Something within Meg
seemed to snap; suddenly she was suffused with a sense of coolness, a
bewildering drainage of the fever that had coursed through her veins.

So funny. So funny to have thought this battle important. It wasn't,
really. It was all a mistake. And the sword in her hand? Meg glanced at
it idly, her charge slowing to a walk. She cast the sword away.

The din of conflict was a thin and distant sound. The world about her
was sweet and green ... the clouds billowed on an endless blue like
boat-sails scudding before the wind. _There was something she should
remember._ There was a dancing haze before her eyes ... flowers about
her feet. Were she to wander gently, now, to that farthest field--_what
was it she could not remember?_--there would be golden buttercups and
the prim, starch cornflower ripe for plucking.

Her body was numbed and drowsy with a sense of comfort. Only--_there
was a Man; a Man named Daiv_--only she could not be happy here. Not
unless she forgot her troubles, forgot the man named Daiv, forgot the
world was spinning and reeling and swirling before her eyes like a
gigantic wheel going faster and faster and faster....

Then there was blackness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her first thought was that she had fallen, momentarily stunned, on the
field of battle. She woke with a start, groping for the sword that
should be by her side.

It wasn't there. She touched the flabby flesh of a breeding-mother
who, flaccid-breasted and aquiver, shook beside her in an ecstasy of
fear. Meg gagged as she stumbled to her feet. Her limbs were still
weak beneath her, as if the veins that fed them had been fouled; her
head was filled with tiny imps who danced and shrieked unmercifully.
But--she was alive! And the mists were clearing from her brain.

Now she knew there was sobbing beside her. Strange sobbing. Not the
soft, easy gulping of a breeding-mother; a harsh sound like the rasp
of an adze on _creet_. It was Lora, Chieftain of the Warriors. Her
armor crusted with blood, her great hands twisting with grief, she was
rocking backward and forward, alternately weeping and cursing the Gods.

"Now accursed be the breeding-mother that gave me birth!" was her
plaint. "This night shall my stars burn as cinders--"

Meg shook her shoulder roughly.

"Lora!"

The Warrior Chieftain's eyes recognized her. Lora cried prayerfully,
"Search well your girdle, Meg! Have you a dagger upon you?"

"No. But, why--?"

Lora beat her tiny, thwarted breasts with clenched fists. "I live!" she
choked. "I, their leader, continue to live, while they lie there, in
peace and glory--"

Meg saw, then, that she was part of a group huddled in the center of
that which had been the fortress of their Clan. They numbered more
than three score; a mixed group of battle-grimed Warriors, Workers,
breeding-mothers, even one or two pale-faced, weeping Men. The studs of
the Jinnia Clan.

But there was another group at the far end of the court. These would
never again either laugh or mourn. They were the dead. Workers and
Warriors for the most part, although a few plump, bulbous bodies fed
the mound. In still another place lay the bodies of the slain invaders;
these had been accorded more dignity. All about the arena lay curiously
shaped pebbles which--Meg knew, shivering clammily--were not pebbles.
Two stunted yellow men, grinning callously, now busied themselves
raking up these grisly objects.

Meg said, "The--the Mother?" and as if in answer to her thought, a
gentle voice reached her ears.

"I am here, Meg, my daughter."

       *       *       *       *       *

Meg turned swiftly. The Mother of the Clan lay behind her, motionless,
head lifted upon a bolt of cloth someone had provided. There was an
image of dreadful pain in the Mother's eyes. Meg sprang to her side,
heart bursting with sorrow.

"Mother--you are hurt!"

"Nay, daughter, I am slain." The Mother sighed; a wan breath of regret.
"They had no intent to kill me. But the rays were too potent for my
aged body. I will linger yet a little while, then I must go. It is sad
that I must leave my Clan captive to a race of beasts like these."

Meg said, "Rays, Mother?"

"Yes, my child. Those weapons which our Warriors could not comprehend
are similar to those which, in the old legends, it is told the Ancient
Ones used to destroy each other. Vibrations that cause, in one case
horrible death; in the other case, stupefaction."

"But--but how?"

"I am not sure. But I think the cherry-light has the power of absorbing
all water from the human body, thus dwindling it instantly to a husk.
The green ray interrupts the nerve-centers, breaking the brain's
contacts with other organs." The Mother's face was resigned. "All
these things and many others you would have learned, Meg, had not this
catastrophe come upon us. And had not you returned from the Place of
the Gods with--a mate."

Her last word reminded Meg of that latent question which the green ray
had driven from her mind. Instantly her heart was cold with dread.

"Daiv! Oh, Mother--Daiv! I do not see him. Is he one of--of those?"

Her eyes stared with horrid fascination at the tiny pile of simulacra
the invading warriors were raking together. But it was not the Mother
who answered. It was Lora, now come to their side. The Warrior
Chieftain's lean face was etched with scorn.

"No, Meg, your Man-thing is not there! That would be an honorable death
for him."

Meg faltered, "Then--then where--?"

The Mother's eyes, in pity, would not meet Meg's. "He fled, Meg."

"Fled! Daiv fled!" Meg stared, every fibre of her body taut as the gut
of a bow. "I--I do not believe it!"

Even Lora's harsh voice was more gentle as she said, "It is true. He
was but a Man, Meg; a Man, weak and cowardly. With the first breath of
fighting he turned and fled the camp. Into the hills beyond."

The Mother intervened, "Perhaps it is better so, my daughter. Perhaps
your own madness escaped on his limbs? If ever we win free of this
host--"

Meg's new-found world of love and happiness crumpled into shards about
her feet. There was a redness on her cheeks, for Daiv and for herself
who had let his mouth touch hers. The rains of weakness filled her
eyes, and she said, "So be it, Mother--"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was at that moment a coarse, guttural voice interrupted her.

"Ah--there she is! That's the one, Leekno. Step forth, ivory one!"

Meg turned. Staring at her, his lips red and moist as the pepper-fruit,
was the golden-greaved and helmeted commander whose actions had at once
saved her life and broken her will for battle. A fungoid puff-ball of
a man with twisting mouth, his eyes upon her made Meg feel suddenly
naked and unclean. She shuddered.

"Step forth, I say!" repeated the leader. A yellow soldier moved to
enforce his command. Meg shook free of the underling's touch, moved
a step forward with a proud freedom of motion that wakened a dancing
light in her accoster's eyes.

His voice was a purr of satisfaction.

"I was right. Very well, Leekno, you may distribute the other captives
to our men by lot. And mind there be no wrangling amongst them. This
barbarian I will take to my tent."

Meg demanded, "What is the meaning of this, little monster? Who are you
to thus address a Priestess of the Jinnia Clan, and what would you of
me?"

The commander's slant eyes blinked in appreciative delight. "A spirited
filly, this!" he murmured. "Know, then, Woman, that you are greatly
honored. I am Grensu, captain of this band. We are a legion of the
mighty race of Japcans who rule in the sunny land of Mayco, many days'
march to the south of here."

From behind Meg the aged Mother's voice stirred in sighing wonder.
"Mayco? In the books of the Ancient Ones it is written of a land by
that name. But its rulers were white men--"

Grensu made mirthless happy-sounds in his throat.

"The old one surprises me. Aye, withered crone, in the early days it
was as you say. But that was before the great wars, and before the
rebellion of the Women. Even then there were in Mayco many of our race,
children of the Sun.

"But when mankind destroyed itself and the Ancient Ones died out,
battling first each other, then between their sexes, we stayed aloof;
we waited and planned and bred. Our Japni blood mixed well with that
of the Maycans, giving rise to the mighty stock we now represent--the
Japcans." Grensu glanced down his own obese frame pridefully. "Now,
not only are we the possessors of the secrets of the Ancient Ones'
war-weapons, but we are become perfect in body and brain."

Meg laughed scornfully, "Little fat-bellied lemon, I could squeeze
between my fingers--_so_!" And she took a step toward Grensu. For a
second he looked startled; then an expression of mingled pique and
admiration mottled his pudgy features.

"You will make a haughty doe to tame, ivory one," he smirked, "but tame
you I will. Come!"

Still Meg did not move.

"Come where?"

"Have I not said," Grensu informed her, "that you are to be favored?
Like the Wild Ones who infest the forests of your land, we of Mayco
find need of new and sturdy mates. That is the purpose of our
expedition. But you, white-limbs, I have chosen for myself!"

The high color rushed to Meg's cheeks.

"Me, little toadstool! Know you not I am a priestess and inviolate?"

Grensu's waning patience snapped. He turned to his lieutenant.
"Leekno--!" he said.




                              CHAPTER IV

                             Meg's Daring


But not at that moment was Meg to be forced to make the choice between
submission and death. For there came an interruption. One of the Japcan
lieutenants approached the group, hailed his leader.

"The wall is set up, O Grensu! The men await your inspection before
setting its field into operation."

Grensu snarled, "Away, sluggard. Cannot the men do the least thing
without--Very well. I will come immediately. Leekno, stay you here and
keep a watchful eye on my reluctant priestess. I will return soon."

He waddled away, a lecherous ball of dough in gold armor. He joined at
a little distance a group of invaders huddled over a strange, shining
box. From this emanated fine bars of soft god-metal. There was brief
conversation between Grensu and the workers, then one of the yellow
dwarfs nodded and pressed down a standing lever.

There rose a startled cry from the captive Jinnia tribeswomen. For a
crackling wave of thunder rolled about the camp; arcing out from the
two arms of the magic box came an invisible something that sent dust
flying as it scratched a mysterious circle about the entire village.

At the opposite end of this circle the two racing walls of invisibility
met; there was a concussive echo and a blinding flash. Somewhere high
above came the rare pain-cry of a buzzard; as the Women watched, the
sheered hinder half of a bird-of-prey plummeted to the ground, fell
with a thud, lay there flopping and bleeding--already dead!

Lora cried, "Walls without bricks!" and Meg looked at the guard
incredulously.

"What marvel is this, ochre toad?" she asked. "I see no beam, no ray,
yet a bird is slain."

Leekno growled, "Mind your tongue, Woman!" but he grinned. "The bird
must have been right above the circle when Togi switched on the
force-field."

"Force-field?" repeated Meg dazedly. She was not sure, now, but that
the Clan had erred in opposing these invaders. Surely men--howsoever
ugly and miscolored--who possessed magics like this must be Gods in
themselves. It might be wise to submit to them without further ado.
Then she thought of her own tribal Gods. Of stern, judicial Jarg and
smiling Tedhi. Of the ringletted Taamuz and the sorrow-eyed Ibrim
carven in eternal rock in the salt wastes so many marches from here.
No, her Gods were the true Gods....

       *       *       *       *       *

"You don't know what a force-field is, eh, Woman? Well, I suppose not.
Come along, then; I'll show you. It will teach you that you can't
escape."

Leekno led the way to the spot where armed guards huddled ever the
god-box. Grensu had left; with his engineers he had gone off to some
privy conference. Beside the scratched soil which marked the barrier,
Leekno paused. His grin was mocking deviltry.

"I think, Woman," he said, "I shall let you escape. Flee now, while no
one is looking."

Meg's heart leaped in her breast as a startled fawn at the voice of a
hunter. Swiftly she breathed, "My undying thanks, yellow friend. Meg
the Priestess will never forget this--"

She sprang forward. The surrounding forest was but a few yards distant;
let her reach that leafy fastness no dwarfed invader could ever
recapture her. She would flee to a neighboring tribe, there find help
for her captured Clanswomen....

These thoughts spun dizzily through her brain as she took three ...
four ... five leaping strides to freedom. And then there came a
violent, staggering shock! Pain trembled through her body, flooding her
with torment; it was as though a mighty hand had struck her across the
face, bruised her straining breast, flung her backward.

She lay in a crumpled heap, dazed, shaken, upon the ground. And in
her ears was the belly-deep, taunting laughter of the yellow-skinned
guards--and Leekno! Leekno's bulbous body quivered with jelly-like
mirth; fun-waters streamed from his eyes.

"'Meg the Priestess,'" he howled, "'will never forget this'! How right
you were, white-legs. Tell me, is it your bruises that will keep the
memory fresh in your mind?"

Meg said nothing. But she reached out, cautiously, before her. This
time it was a hesitant finger, rather than the reckless force of a
headlong plunge, that touched the invisible wall. Even so, her finger
jerked like a slain snake as jolting current grounded through her. Her
jaw set, Meg endured the pain, pressing.

Nothing happened. With every ounce of her whiplash strength behind that
finger, she could not make it penetrate that barrier.

She rose, a great anger cold in the pit of her stomach. To the
still-laughing guards she said, "This is a coward's weapon, O dwarfs
the color of slime! Yet it will take more than this wall-without-bricks
to save you when my neighboring Clanswomen come to rescue us. Their
swords and arrows will hack this fanged barrier to bits--"

"So?" mocked Leekno. "Move aside, Togi." And he stepped over the
god-box, moved to his right, and was facing Meg. "Togi will lend you
his dagger, Woman. Hurl it at my breast and learn the truth."

Meg snatched the proffered weapon eagerly. And in the same movement
spun and whipped it squarely at Leekno's bulky frame. There was a
brief, scintillant prick of light. The dagger dropped harmlessly to
earth at the circle's rim. Leekno's thick lips continued to grin as he
returned through the portal which stretched above the box.

"Thus you have learned, Woman, that there is no escape. And now--back
to your companions!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Mother said, "Meg!" Her voice was a whisper, so low that Meg could
scarcely hear it.

The priestess bent beside her. "Yes, Mother?"

"The force-wall. You have seen it?"

Meg said despairingly, "I have seen it, Mother. No Woman can pass
through it. Nor can a weapon."

"Yet," whispered the older woman weakly, "there is an avenue of
escape. I watched while the yellow one taunted you. As all who mock,
he revealed his own weakness. Did you not notice that twice he passed
unharmed through the wall?"

Meg said sadly, "Not through, O Mother. But at the point of meeting
where lies the god-box. I--" Then quick excitement touched her
fingertips with fire. "Mother! That which he did, so can I do also!"

"Hush, my daughter! Yes, from that point only may you hope to escape.
And escape you must, Meg. Flee to the Clan at Loovil, tell them of
our plight. Once we aided them when the Wild Ones laid siege to their
village. Their Mother will lend you Warriors; perhaps other Clans will
also help."

Meg begged, "But, Mother, _how_? I cannot--"

"I have shown you the way, Meg. You must take care of the rest."

The Mother fell back, breathing heavily. The crisp rasp of footsteps
raised Meg's head. Grensu, his investigations ended, had returned to
claim his linbered mate. There was triumph in his eyes as Meg rose,
obedient to his command.

"So, ivory one, you have decided to accept my favors? That is well.
Come with me!"

Only Meg knew that her meekness was the blind obedience of a body
reacting without the counsel of a mind. Meg was thinking, thinking
desperately. Seeking some ruse which would give her the time, the
opportunity, the speed and the weapon she needed.

Grensu, warfare forgotten now, was anticipating a pleasant interlude.
"You will not find me a bad companion," he boasted. "I am a mighty
leader and a strong man, my wild doe--"

Doe! Suddenly it was all clear in Meg's mind. The Japcans had, upon
seizing the village, immediately taken into custody the few horses
owned by the Jinnia Clanswomen. But there was Nessa! Surely no one
could suspect that soft-eyed creature of being anything but a camp pet;
of being a steed broken to the rein and spur....

She turned to Grensu with an exclamation of dismay.

"My doe! My lovely pet! You destroyed her?"

Grensu said placatingly, "Was the doe thine, white one? No, she has not
been killed--yet. Though her meat--"

Meg prayed that the Japcan leader would read the actions of her body
rather than the purpose that stood printed in her burning eyes.

"You are going to kill my Nessa? My lovely doe; my pet from childhood?
You must let me see her once again, bid her farewell--"

"Now, Woman," snapped Grensu crossly, "there is no time for that!"

"I beg it of you--" Meg drew a deep breath, hating the word that must
defile her lips, "--my Master!"

"Well, if you must, then." Grensu looked pleased. It was a small price
to pay for willing compliance. His face still bore the nail-marks of
that screaming harridan he had captured in Lanta, and she had been a
much less tempting morsel than this Woman. "Well, if you must--"

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned aside, led Meg to the small grassy patch in which Nessa,
untethered, was wont to graze. With a cry of gladness Meg threw her
arms about the doe's neck. She sobbed openly, startling even the
well-trained Nessa with the fervor of her caresses. And purposely she
took a long time; so long that Grensu's impatience rose.

"That will do now, Woman. Let us go!"

"Not yet! Not yet!" pleaded Meg. "Later--"

"Now!" insisted Grensu. He stepped forward to disengage Meg's arms. For
the barest fraction of a second his both hands were free and weaponless.

And in that split second Meg moved. "About!" she cried to Nessa. The
doe wheeled, throwing Grensu off balance. As he tottered, vain ball of
yellow fat, Meg's left arm found his throat, choked him into crimson
breathlessness. Her free hand whipped the golden sword from his
scabbard; then, as he fell limply to the ground, she sprang to Nessa's
back.

"On, Nessa!" she screamed--and her heels bit the doe's flanks.

[Illustration: Meg leaped astride the doe, and kicked her heels into
its flanks. With a wild leap it sprang into motion through the ranks of
the little men.]

She was halfway across the open walk-avenue of the village before the
first startled cry of warning seared an invader's throat. She was
flaming down upon the god-box, the narrow gateway of the magic wall, by
the time that shout had spun its guardians' heads about.

Then there was mad confusion. Meg cried, "Nessa! Leap, Nessa!" even
as Togi and his companion guards fumbled for their ray-sticks. The
foremost was the first to lift his weapon to her breast--but even as he
would have released its charge Meg's sword was biting through the thin
plate of his shoulder-harness.

The Japcan screamed horribly and clutched with his free hand at a
grisly stump from which spurted a scarlet ribbon of blood. The fingers
of his severed arm contracted in an insensate reflex; cherry flame
spewed from a stick rolling aimlessly upon the ground--and another of
the guards crisped into steaming filth before it.

Now a jolt shook Meg as Nessa's cloven hooves met solid earth, and a
brazen cry of gladness split the air.

"On, Nessa!"

It was like part of some nightmarish dream to see that beneath and
behind her lay groveling bodies of those who would have stayed her
passage; that the blade of her once gleaming sword now glinted with
the bright crimson of death. But it was a joyous dream--for she was
over the portal, through the barrier. Just a few more strides of the
frightened doe, now, and she would be safe within the forest.

If--she glanced back over her shoulder. If one of those now springing
from the camp did not succeed in snaring her brain once again with that
green ray. Or if--but Meg did not want to think about that other more
ruthless weapon.

Her deft hands guided Nessa right ... then left ... a zigzag path to
spoil the dwarfling's aim. Once air hissed and crackled beside her head
as a burst of cherry-flame just missed her, flashed by to cinder a huge
tree instantly into a withered, massive twig. Her nostrils caught the
stench of scorched hair, and Nessa whimpered piteously--but the doe's
hoofbeats never faltered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once again Meg's brain spun with a brief moment of dizziness; she
found herself thinking how pale and lovely was the sunset--and knew,
instantly, that the green ray had found her. She ducked her head with
a last conscious gesture, and was rewarded by feeling sense flood back
like a cleansing tide.

And then green branches were whipping across her face, her fair skin
was slashed with the hungry clutch of forest brambles--but she did
not feel their hurt. Joy rose in her heart, joy like the glory of the
newborn moon. Free! Free to find aid for her Clanswomen!

Free to--

At the last moment she saw it! Saw it and screamed a sharp cry to
Nessa. The trained doe obeyed that cry, but both Meg and the deer were
powerless before the eternal force that bore them onward--the force of
gravitation.

For that which Meg, too late, had seen, was a patch of green soil
too fresh, too even, to match the surrounding earth. Even as Nessa's
scrambling feet struggled vainly for security, even as Meg felt herself
pitching headlong and helpless from the doe's back, she knew that
Daiv--gone, now, forever--had been right in cursing the traps with
which her Clan destroyed the Wild Ones.

It was one of these traps that now, in her moment of triumph, had
destroyed her!

Then Nessa's querulous bleat was in her ears; her loins quivered
with the fall-feeling; the sunlight fled, and darkness engulfed all.
Darkness and great, dizzying circles of pain that drove the breath
from her body. She tried to cry out. The cry died in her throat. Fiery
needles scored her arm, and breath deserted her. Dull silence....




                               CHAPTER V

                          Wrath and Uprising


It was a strange heaven and hell in which she stirred feebly. Heaven
because she rested on a soft, warm couch of fur; hell because a horde
of flaming pain-imps wrenched and tugged and twisted at her sword-arm.
Heaven because a thick, earthy fragrance was about her; hell because
dinning in her ears was a babble of coarse and indistinguishable
chatter.

Meg opened her eyes--then closed them, shuddering violently--knowing,
now, that this was neither heaven nor hell, but life. Life futile and
unwanted.

She was lying at the bottom of the Wild One trap, her right arm bent
crookedly beneath her, her body aching with a hundred bruises. But
alive. Alive because the warm, furry bed on which she lay was the body
of Nessa, cruelly pierced and broken by the sharp-pointed sticks from
which the doe's bulk had saved Meg.

Meg's eyes filled with waters of sorrow and pain. Sweet Nessa, gallant
Nessa, was gone. And now--

And now above her, squat silhouettes against the blue sky, were the
Japcans from whom she had _almost_ escaped. Even now one of their
number was being lowered into the pit; was reaching for her warily, one
hand clutching a ray-stick. Meg groped, with her good left hand, for
the sword she had dropped, but the yellow dwarf's finger tightened,
green radiation expunged all thought from her brain. As in a dream she
felt herself being lifted and borne, surrounded by fat figures whose
voices were raised in angry condemnation.

Then she was again within the confines of the camp and Grensu was
before her, his tiny, slant eyes aflame with bitterness.

"You have animal cunning, priestess of a barbarian race," spat the
Japcan commander. "I erred in believing you docile. Henceforth your
taming will be that of the scourge and the chain."

Meg said nothing. But she noticed, her head lifting proudly, that
some of the little man's confidence had deserted him, and that as he
spoke he moved his stiff neck gingerly from side to side. There was
throttling strength in the crook of Meg's elbow.

Leekno, his sallow face rebellious, was at Grensu's side.

"What is your command, O Grensu? Shall we destroy the white-limbed one?"

Leadership and desire met in conflict on Grensu's swart features. "The
woman pleases me--" he growled.

"She slew," reminded the lesser officer, "Togi, Ras and Yinga. Two
others lie wounded. It is written in the Law 'Death shall be punished
with death--'"

"I know the Law!" snapped Grensu. "But now we are not in Mayco. Here,
_I_ am the Law. And I am minded to--" A hesitation halted his words. Of
Meg he demanded, "Make your plea, Woman. Grensu listens."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a coursing pain in Meg's arm that began at her fingertips,
sped through forearm and upper arm, spread even to the rest of her
body, turning her stomach with nausea. Her heart was sick with
disappointment. Almost had she succeeded. But "almost" was a bitter
draught from the waters of might-have-been.

This day, which had dawned so fair and with such great hopes, had
become a leaden weight to her heart. There was nothing, now, worth
living for. Daiv, her mate, in combat had proven a coward. The beloved
Mother of her Clan lay dying. A score of her sisters were pellets of
death, heaped in a pile of rubble. Her last, desperate attempt at
freedom had failed.

"I make no plea, yellow man," she said haughtily.

The Japcan warriors muttered amongst themselves. Grensu's ripe lips
pursed irately.

"You do not understand, ivory one. I offer you one last opportunity.
Pledge fealty to me at even this late moment and your life will be
spared. Your wounds will be soothed by our healers, and, yes, even now
Grensu will permit you the great honor of becoming his mate." His slant
eyes probed hers. "Well, Woman? What is your answer?"

A laugh of sheer hysteria; a laugh that was half a sob, broke from
Meg's throat. She stepped toward the little yellow commander.

"This is my answer!"

And she spat squarely in the dwarfling's face!

Grensu turned livid. Beneath his yellow skin the blood surged
unhealthily, turning him to a sallow parody of a man. Fat fingers shook
as he wiped his face, screamed viciously, "Seize her! Put her to the
sword, Leekno! No--wait!"

Flames of pure hatred danced from his eyes. "Who defiles the haughty
blood of Japcan shall not die thus painlessly. Her death shall be a
slow one; one in which, shrieking for mercy, she shall have time to
remember this moment!"

He stood quivering, shaken, searching the dregs of his mind for a
fitting torment. Meg, waiting, saw from the corner of her eye a faint
movement to her right. The Warrior Chieftain, Lora, had stolen close
to one of the stunted invaders; her hand was even now reaching for
his sword. Meg knew the meaning of that trial. Lora well knew she had
no chance to fight or escape; her sole purpose was to clutch that
sword and plunge it through Meg's heart to spare the priestess worse
horrors. Then, though both of them died, their deaths would be clean
and welcome....

Meg wrenched her eyes away; tensed her body for the moment of cold
fire. And then--

There came a shout from the portal. The voice of a Japcan guard crying
amusedly, "By the Serpent, O Grensu--we are attacked by a band of naked
apes! Come you and view this wonder!"

All wheeled. And a swift hope flamed in Meg as she saw that the new
besiegers were--a host of the Wild Ones!

Lora, at Meg's side in one swift bound, cried out hoarsely, "What other
marvels shall the Gods send us this day, my priestess? Behold, even the
skulking rats of the forest have this day turned against us! Are we,
then, accursed?"

But Meg, forgetting her pain as for the moment she had been forgotten,
gasped as the full import of this raid broke upon her.

"It is not _us_ they attack, Lora! See who commands the Wild Ones!"

The leader was not hard to discern. His supple, hairless body stood
out like a living white flame against the background of gnarled, hairy
ones. His chestnut mane towered a full head above the tallest of the
Wild Ones, and he bore a great, rusted, two-handed sword in one hand,
waving it as a child a shaking-gourd. It was Daiv!

       *       *       *       *       *

Then Grensu's hand was upon Meg's shoulder, spinning her about. To a
brace of yellow warriors he was howling, "To the _hoams_ with this
prisoner. We will attend to her when we have broken these foolish
Man-things from the forests. Come!"

He moved away with his lieutenants as Meg was taken to the _hoam_
wherein her sisters had been confined. Brutally she was shoved inside;
the two guards took their posts at the doorway. Meg pushed her way to a
window to better watch the battle.

There was little--pitifully little--to watch. By the time she reached
her vantage point, the horde of Wild Ones had deployed in a great
circle about the Jinnia village; now, at a signal from Daiv, they rose
like a great, swarthy tide and rushed down upon their enemy.

With their advance, a groan of despair rose from the imprisoned women.
Daiv had made his escape too soon. He had not seen, had not suspected,
the existence of a weapon such as the Japcans' force-wall. At one
moment a throng of roaring Wild Ones was racing upon the village; at
the next, scores were piled, shaken and bruised, before that invisible
barrier, unharmed, but--futile!

How futile, they did not at first realize. There was courage in the
hearts of the Wild Ones. Courage the existence of which the Clanswomen
had not dreamed. Despite their bruises and the racking pain which--Meg
knew from experience--was throbbing through their veins, they rose from
the ground; they hurled themselves once again and viciously at the wall
they could not see.

Lances shattered against that impenetrable force-field; swords were
hammered into blunt grips--but the Wild Ones could not effect entry.

Daiv was everywhere at once; begging, pleading, cajoling his new-found
army into greater effort. Twice Meg trembled as he threw himself vainly
against that force; she matched, with her own cheeks, the whiteness
in his as the second time he picked himself up weak, pain-racked,
exhausted. She gripped the arm of the Woman nearest her; it was Lora.

[Illustration: An invisible wall seemed to rear itself before him as
Daiv hurled his body forward.]

"They outnumber the Japcans. That is what my mate counted on; that
though many might fall before the rays of the yellow ones, enough would
break through to free us! We must help them!"

Lora shook her head grimly.

"The Gods know we want to. But we cannot."

"We can! If we can turn off that god-box before it is too late--!"

Meg screamed the final words. For she had seen, now, that which must
ultimately destroy the attackers. The Japcans, having had their fill
of mirth at the sight of this impossible attack, were now preparing
to go into action. In full view of the Wild Ones they were spreading
out, taking positions behind the invisible wall. Their ray-sticks were
poised and ready. A signal came from Grensu, grinning evilly in the
center of the walk-avenue.

"Drop screen! Fire! Up screen!"

       *       *       *       *       *

As swiftly as he spoke, the events occurred. The engineer at the
god-box threw up his lever; instantly sticks in two score hands spewed
cherry flame into the ranks of the Wild Ones. Steam rose; bodies
disappeared; weapons dropped from hands now dwindled into cinders.
Then the force-field was replaced. By sheer chance, one or two hurled
weapons flashed through in the brief instant the barrier was down. One
dwarf clutched, screaming miserably, at a pronged lance that split
his throat in twain, bore him backward and pinned him to the ground
to writhe out his life. Another collapsed, moaning, his thigh-bone
shattered by a huge, hurled stone.

Meg's eyes sought Daiv frantically; found him. He still lived, but even
at that distance she could read the sickness in his eyes as he stared
dazedly at the dead about him.

Even as she watched, Grensu gave the triple order again. "Drop screen!
Fire! Up screen!"

And once more death stalked amongst the attackers, choosing his victims
with fingers of cherry-flame....

Lora's grasp shook the dread from Meg's eyes.

"You are the swiftest among us, priestess," cried the Warrior
Chieftain. "_You_ must reach the god-box."

Then Meg saw that Lora had not been inactive. She had gathered about
her all those of the Clan who were not disabled. A motley crew they
were. Hard-lipped Warriors, coarse-skinned Workers. There were
even--amazingly--three breeding-mothers in that little band! Their
billowing hips and pale, soft faces were strange attributes for a
fighting woman, but their eyes were lighted with the same fire that
suffused the eyes of Meg and Lora.

One of these, a woman named 'Ana, said now to Meg, "Once long ago,
Priestess, I too aspired to be a Mother. It was not so fated, and this
more humble lot became mine. But I will do my little part for you, for
the Mother, and for the Clan--"

Lora interrupted crisply, "You're slim, Meg, and you're fast. We will
create a disturbance at the door--" A tight and humorless smile played
upon her lips. "Then must you break through the window, somehow reach
the god-box."

Meg nodded. Her right arm dangled loosely at her side, but the pain
that had seared it was devoured now in a greater intensity, a more
vital urge. "So be it, Lora!"

"Then strike, Women!" cried the chieftain. Strong shoulders struck the
door with ravaging force; wood splintered, and the door burst from its
hinges like a splitting pod. Outside, the two yellow guards wheeled,
their eyes wide, their hands streaking for the ray-sticks in their
harnesses. One raised a shout.

Meg had only time to see that her Clanswomen were pounding through
the doorway, that both guards had fallen before them, that the tumult
had drawn the attention of the yellow men assembled in their tactical
circle. All eyes were focused on the escaping prisoners spilling from
the door; no one noticed as she clambered awkwardly from the window on
the farther side of the _hoam_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Meg's village; she knew its every twist and turn. She did not
take at all times to the shortest route; she chose that which would
disclose her least as she moved toward the vulnerable spot of the
Japcan defense; the god-box.

But if the dwarfs could not see her, neither could she see them. She
marked the progress of the split battle by those few sounds she could
identify. Most important was the fact that she did not again hear
Grensu's voice raised in the commands to drop and raise the force-wall.
Destruction was, then, not presently breathing through the ranks of the
Wild Ones....

But her own folk? Meg could only pray silently to the gods that their
bravery might not be in vain--and continue running.

It was a short journey, but the torment within her brain made it
endless. It seemed hours later that Meg found herself finally
slipping through the last shaded alley, facing the spot which was her
destination--the spot on the invisible circle's perimeter where lay the
god-box.

Now confronted her but a few scant yards, and these the most dangerous
of all. Could she cross these without drawing the fire of the guards
about the box, she could lift that lever, if only for a moment, and let
in the battering host of Wild Ones. Once she had raised it, Meg vowed,
the lever would remain upright so long as she had a hand to hold it.

The Gods favored her in two ways. The guards about the box were looking
the other way, gaping at this astonishing counter-attack being made
by the supposedly vanquished Women. And--at Meg's feet lay something
that had been overlooked by the detail of yellow soldiery assigned to
cleaning up evidence of the first battle! One of the yellow invaders'
ray-sticks!

With difficulty Meg stifled the cry that leaped to her lips. From force
of habit, she stopped to lift the stick with her right hand; winced
with pain when those benumbed fingers touched the ground and refused
to grasp the object. Her left hand gripped it, held it; her questing
fingers found the button that activated its ray.

Which ray, Meg had no way of knowing. Nor could she take time to
experiment. Like a swift, golden ghost she sprang from the shelter of
her alley into the cleared space. She was halfway across that space
when one of the guardians of the god-box, by sheer chance, happened to
turn and see her.

His mouth opened in a shout of warning that never emerged. For Meg
lifted the stick--pressed the button! A spurt of cherry-flame engulfed
the dwarf, and he sank lifeless to the ground.

But his death was warning enough. Shock slowed the turn of the
other guardians, and in their slowness lay their doom. Meg's finger
remained rigid on the button; her ray swept clear the defenders of the
force-field--and she had reached her goal!

With a great shout of triumph she stumbled through that foul, steamy
mist, feeling scorched cinders beneath her feet, and found the lever.
With a mighty heave of her shoulders she forced it upward--

Then all was Bedlam!




                              CHAPTER VI

                      "The Old Order Changeth--"


A new note rose suddenly in the din of battle. It had been a howling
note of despair before; the outraged cries of impotent Wild Ones
mingling with the dying screams of the gallant Women. Now there rose to
the skies a paean of joyous triumph. Hoarse masculine voices cheered
madly as the horde of hairy Wild Ones found the barrier before them
gone. Daiv foremost, their avenging circle closed in upon the village.

Where but a few moments before this engagement had been a slaughter
of the Jinnians upon which the Wild Ones had been forced to look
helplessly, now the battle became a free-for-all, split into a
half-hundred tiny sectors.

Here a cherry-flame, wielded by a retreating dwarf in tarnished armor,
winked its ruddy eye amongst Men who cried out, steamed, and fell.
There a dozen Wild Ones hurled themselves upon a tiny knot of Japcans,
literally ripped the yellow men into bloody shreds, and raced on--with
one of the Wild Ones now brandishing a lethal ray-stick!

Still another place a handful of Mayco invaders fought vainly to fight
a diverse foe--the Women before them and the Wild Ones who charged upon
their flank. Up to now the Japcans had been content to subdue this
Jinnia uprising with the green, stupefying ray; now they broke out
their red weapon. Meg curdled with agony to see Women die beneath that
cherry-flame.

But--Daiv?

Even as her mind asked the question, she found him. He had been at
the farthermost perimeter of the circle; now he was racing recklessly
across the central arena toward her. In haste or sheer bravado he had
picked up no ray-weapon, but still brandished the huge, two-handed
sword with which he had stormed the citadel.

But it was not this that miraculously saved his life from the lightning
of crimson that flashed about him. It was his instinctive grace and
agility, his perfect sense of timing. More than once Meg's lips formed
a wordless shout as it seemed one of those flaming tubes must surely
spend its charge on his smooth, gallant body. Each time Daiv saw the
new danger, swerved to avoid the ray. And more than once his mighty
sword accounted for the dwarf who would have been his destroyer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then, from another angle of the courtyard, burst a fat, bustling
figure. Grensu. His golden armor, once so proud, was now dented in a
score of places; there was a red stain upon his forehead, his ripe lips
were working with a fearsome rage.

His objective was Meg, and upon her he was advancing, mouthing vile
threats.

"So, ivory one, you think to triumph at last? Know, then, that Grensu
takes with him in defeat his adversaries!"

And he raised his ray-weapon to cover Meg. For the first time in all
those hectic moments, a sense of personal fear weakened the Priestess'
knees. It had not seemed ill to die for a worthy cause. But now--when
the cause was almost won, and when, in moments, her lover's arms would
have been about her--But, as ever, Grensu's vaingloriousness was his
own undoing. Once too often had he stayed his vengeance for a speech.
Now as his finger tightened on the button that would blast Meg into
rancid oblivion a tremendous object came hurtling through the air.

It was Daiv's claymore. Seeing there was no other way to halt Grensu's
move, Daiv had heaved it squarely at the dwarfling commander with all
the strength his mighty arms possessed. It was like a whistling flail
of the Gods as it cleft the air; ripped the ray-tube from Grensu's
hand, and with the spitting stick sheared yellow fingers.

Then, even as Grensu howled his pain and turned to flee, Daiv was upon
him. He lifted the squat, heavy dwarf, massive armor and all, above his
head; shook him as a dog might shake a ground-rat. Grensu's thick lips
blubbered incoherent pleas, his eyes bulged wildly. But there was stone
in Daiv's breast.

By the head and the calves he grasped the screaming commander; his arms
made one sweeping motion. Grensu's fearful bleat ended in a choked wail
of agony ... something snapped like a forest twig....

Grensu lay still.

       *       *       *       *       *

Afterward, one of the Wild Ones came to Daiv where he stood with Meg
beside a god-box that now lay quiescent on the ground.

"They call for the Priestess, Master," he grinned. "The Old One lies
dying. Will you bring the lovely one to the _hoam_?"

Daiv said, "I have told you, Wilm, that it is not necessary to call me
'Master.' I am a Man, like yourself; we are all Men, proud and noble.
Do not forget." To Meg he said, "You remember Wilm; don't you, Golden
One?"

Meg did, though it was difficult to see behind the grinning, confident
features of this hairy one the same terrified creature whom Daiv
had rescued from the pit just the day--could it be so short a
time?--before. She nodded.

"I remembered Wilm," Daiv told her with a happy-look, "when the
lemon-skinned dwarf band attacked us. From the first I knew our defense
was futile. We were too few. We needed more, and stronger fighters.
So I went for the aid of the Wild Ones--aid which Wilm had pledged me
should I need it.

"Though," he shook his head ruefully, "I did not know they would have
this other weapon, the wall-that-cannot-be-seen, when we returned.
Without your help, Golden One, all would have been lost."

"And without his," mused Meg, "I should be the pale bride of death." It
was an unprecedented gesture for a Woman and a Priestess of the Jinnia
Clan to make, but Meg made it. She stretched forth her hand. "I would
grip your hand in my own, Man of the forests. Henceforth let there be
peace between us."

She winced at Wilm's enthusiastic grip. Then, "But let us make haste, O
Daiv, my love. The Mother sends for me; I fear she will soon go to join
the Gods."

There was already the God-look in the Mother's eyes when they reached
the _hoam_. A look of strange peace, mingled with one of happiness, as
she looked fondly upon Meg.

"I am to be with you but a little while longer, my daughter," she
breathed quietly. "The Gods have called me, their voices stirred in my
ears like the whisper of night-winds in the trees. Soon I shall go."

Meg's happiness was suddenly gray with the cloud of heart-hunger. She
dropped to her knees beside the older woman's side.

"You must not go, O Mother!" she sobbed. "There is much to be done, and
only thy wisdom can achieve it."

The pale hand of the tribal guardian sought, found, Meg's golden head.

"You speak the truth, daughter mine. There is so much to be done. But
already you know how to lead our Clan upward to the stature of the
Ancient Ones. With your mate at your side--"

There was a concerted gasp from the assembled Women of the Clan. The
Mother, hearing, smiled wanly.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yes, thus openly do I approve that of which, from the beginning, my
heart approved. Listen, my children--Meg was right. In her pilgrimage
she learned, as did I many winters ago, that the Gods were Men. Men
like Daiv. She rebelled against the Law that said a Priestess might not
mate--but she was right in her rebellion.

"List, now, for with the all-seeing eyes of one on the threshold of
death I tell you truth. It is right that Women should mate with Men.
There should be no Workers, no Warriors, no breeding-mothers. Our Clan
should own no stud-males, pale chattels like our kine and horses. All
this is wrong."

Lora, her harsh-lined face sagging with confusion, cried, "But,
Mother--the Wild Ones!"

"Never again must we prey upon the Wild Ones. Do you not see that the
Gods avenged our doing so when they permitted Meg to be captured in one
of the pits we dug?

"Henceforth--" The Mother's voice grew weaker, and a hurt-devil pierced
Meg's heart. "There will be peace and amity between Women and the Wild
Ones. I see a day--a day in the future to come--when mankind may again
attain to the heights of the Ancient Ones. In that day the children of
the Ancient Ones may return from the evening star to find a new world
happier than that from which they fled--"

Daiv whispered to Meg, "Her holiness is one with the Gods. Hear now her
sacred vision!" and Meg saw that his eyes were wet with heart-rains.

Then said the Mother to Meg, "Once I deferred judgment upon you, my
child. Now I give my approval of you ... and of this Man who is thy
mate ... and of all you have done. Lead well thy people...." And she
was gone.

A soft murmur stirred through the room, a murmur that was the sobbing
of a bereaved Clan. One by one the Women left the presence of death for
the sunshine and life of the world outside.

Only a huddled group of Japcan captives, over whom grim-jawed Warriors
stood guard, the bodies of those who had fallen in the battle, the
scarred and blasted _hoams_, told of that which had been. Soon all this
would be changed; a new and better existence would rise out of the
mistakes of yesterday.

Wilm was capering at Daiv's side, plucking at his elbow feverishly.
"Daiv, Master--"

"Not 'Master,' Wilm!" reminded Daiv sternly.

"Daiv, friend," corrected the Wild One. "Will the Women do as the aged
one told them? Will they now, perhaps, become our mates?"

There was a pathetic eagerness in his voice. Meg was strangely stirred
by it. Not so the angular Lora, who sniffed aloud.

"The Mother's word is the Law, O hairy thing that smells." Her voice
was derisive. "What Woman of our Clan so excites your fancy? One of
those, I suppose?" She nodded toward a young and buxom breeding-mother,
white-fleshed and not yet plump from over-bearing, who strolled down
the walk-avenue with hips swaying enticingly.

But Wilm shook his head.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That?" he exclaimed. "Pah! What Man would want such a wobbly thing?
I like a strong Woman; a Woman with arms like a weathered oak. A
fighting Woman. A Woman like--" He paused breathlessly. Then, "A Woman
like--_you_!"

"_Me!_"

The Warrior Chieftain gasped. Then the slow crimson started at her
throat, spread slowly upward until it mantled her cheeks. And her voice
was choked. "Like _me_, Man?"

"Not just _like_ you," said Wilm staunchly. "_You!_"

Meg waited for the Chieftain's reply, atingle inside with wonderment
and tickling little fun-bubbles. Then Lora spoke, and her answer was
the answer of all womankind to the new regime....

"You must be mad, Man!" she declared. "But--but I think I like your
madness. We'll discuss it further if you'll go bathe the smell from
your body. And shave off that _awful_ beard...."

Meg looked at Daiv; he looked back at her, and a happy-look was on his
lips. He whispered, "The change has begun, Golden One. The change for
which I hoped. We will live in a new world soon. Surely the poet of the
Ancient Ones wrote truth."

"Poet?" asked Meg. "I do not understand, Daiv."

"His name," said Daiv softly, "was Tensun. Long ages ago he wrote,
'The old order changeth, giving way to new ... and the Gods fulfill
themselves in many ways....'"
